# SICP Chapter 2.4 Exercises

#### Exercise 2.73

2.3.2 described a
program that performs symbolic differentiation:

```rkt
(define (deriv exp var)
  (cond ((number? exp) 0)
        ((variable? exp) 
         (if (same-variable? exp var) 1 0))
        ((sum? exp)
         (make-sum (deriv (addend exp) var)
                   (deriv (augend exp) var)))
        ((product? exp)
         (make-sum
           (make-product 
            (multiplier exp)
            (deriv (multiplicand exp) var))
           (make-product 
            (deriv (multiplier exp) var)
            (multiplicand exp))))
        ⟨@var{more rules can be added here}⟩
        (else (error "unknown expression type:
                      DERIV" exp))))
```

We can regard this program as performing a dispatch on the type of the
expression to be differentiated.  In this situation the ``type tag'' of the
datum is the algebraic operator symbol (such as `+`) and the operation
being performed is `deriv`.  We can transform this program into
data-directed style by rewriting the basic derivative procedure as

```rkt
(define (deriv exp var)
   (cond ((number? exp) 0)
         ((variable? exp) 
           (if (same-variable? exp var) 
               1 
               0))
         (else ((get 'deriv (operator exp)) 
                (operands exp) 
                var))))

(define (operator exp) (car exp))
(define (operands exp) (cdr exp))
```

**1.** Explain what was done above.  Why can't we assimilate the predicates
`number?` and `variable?` into the data-directed dispatch?

**2.** Write the procedures for derivatives of sums and products, and the auxiliary
code required to install them in the table used by the program above.

**3.** Choose any additional differentiation rule that you like, such as the one for
exponents (Exercise 2.56), and install it in this data-directed
system.

**4.** In this simple algebraic manipulator the type of an expression is the algebraic
operator that binds it together.  Suppose, however, we indexed the procedures
in the opposite way, so that the dispatch line in `deriv` looked like

```rkt
((get (operator exp) 'deriv) 
 (operands exp) var)
```


What corresponding changes to the derivative system are required?



#### Exercise 2.74

Insatiable Enterprises, Inc., is
a highly decentralized conglomerate company consisting of a large number of
independent divisions located all over the world.  The company's computer
facilities have just been interconnected by means of a clever
network-interfacing scheme that makes the entire network appear to any user to
be a single computer.  Insatiable's president, in her first attempt to exploit
the ability of the network to extract administrative information from division
files, is dismayed to discover that, although all the division files have been
implemented as data structures in Scheme, the particular data structure used
varies from division to division.  A meeting of division managers is hastily
called to search for a strategy to integrate the files that will satisfy
headquarters' needs while preserving the existing autonomy of the divisions.

Show how such a strategy can be implemented with data-directed programming.  As
an example, suppose that each division's personnel records consist of a single
file, which contains a set of records keyed on employees' names.  The structure
of the set varies from division to division.  Furthermore, each employee's
record is itself a set (structured differently from division to division) that
contains information keyed under identifiers such as `address` and
`salary`.  In particular:

**1.** Implement for headquarters a `get-record` procedure that retrieves a
specified employee's record from a specified personnel file.  The procedure
should be applicable to any division's file.  Explain how the individual
divisions' files should be structured.  In particular, what type information
must be supplied?

**2.** Implement for headquarters a `get-salary` procedure that returns the
salary information from a given employee's record from any division's personnel
file.  How should the record be structured in order to make this operation
work?

**3.** Implement for headquarters a `find-employee-record` procedure.  This
should search all the divisions' files for the record of a given employee and
return the record.  Assume that this procedure takes as arguments an employee's
name and a list of all the divisions' files.

**4.** When Insatiable takes over a new company, what changes must be made in order to
incorporate the new personnel information into the central system?



#### Exercise 2.75

Implement the constructor
`make-from-mag-ang` in mes@-sage-pass@-ing style.  This procedure should be
analogous to the `make-from-real-imag` procedure given above.

#### Exercise 2.76

As a large system with generic
operations evolves, new types of data objects or new operations may be needed.
For each of the three strategies---generic operations with explicit dispatch,
data-directed style, and message-passing-style---describe the changes that
must be made to a system in order to add new types or new operations.  Which
organization would be most appropriate for a system in which new types must
often be added?  Which would be most appropriate for a system in which new
operations must often be added?

