# SICP Chapter 5.4 Exercises

#### Exercise 5.23

Extend the evaluator to handle
derived expressions such as `cond`, `let`, and so on 
(4.1.2).  You may ``cheat'' and assume that the syntax transformers such
as `cond->if` are available as machine operations.

#### Exercise 5.24

Implement `cond` as a new
basic special form without reducing it to `if`.  You will have to
construct a loop that tests the predicates of successive `cond` clauses
until you find one that is true, and then use `ev-sequence` to evaluate
the actions of the clause.

#### Exercise 5.25

Modify the evaluator so that it
uses normal-order evaluation, based on the lazy evaluator of 4.2.

#### Exercise 5.26

Use the monitored stack to
explore the tail-recursive property of the evaluator (5.4.2).
Start the evaluator and define the iterative `factorial` procedure from
1.2.1:

```rkt
(define (factorial n)
  (define (iter product counter)
    (if (> counter n)
        product
        (iter (* counter product)
              (+ counter 1))))
  (iter 1 1))
```

Run the procedure with some small values of $n$.  Record the maximum stack
depth and the number of pushes required to compute ${n!$} for each of these
values.

**1.** You will find that the maximum depth required to evaluate ${n!$} is independent
of $n$.  What is that depth?

**2.** Determine from your data a formula in terms of $n$ for the total number of
push operations used in evaluating ${n!$} for any ${n \ge 1$}.  Note that the
number of operations used is a linear function of $n$ and is thus determined
by two constants.



#### Exercise 5.27

For comparison with Exercise 5.26, 
explore the behavior of the following procedure for computing factorials
recursively:

```rkt
(define (factorial n)
  (if (= n 1)
      1
      (* (factorial (- n 1)) n)))
```

By running this procedure with the monitored stack, determine, as a function of
$n$, the maximum depth of the stack and the total number of pushes used in
evaluating ${n!$} for ${n \ge 1$}.  (Again, these functions will be linear.)
Summarize your experiments by filling in the following table with the
appropriate expressions in terms of $n$:

$$\begin{array}{l|l|l}
                	& \text{Maximum} 	& \text{Number of} 	\\
                	& \text{depth} 	        & \text{pushes} 	\\
\hline
\text{Recursive} 	&	                &  \\
\text{factorial} 	&  	                &  \\
\hline
\text{Iterative} 	&               	&  \\
\text{factorial} 	&  	                & 
\end{array}
$$

The maximum depth is a measure of the amount of space used by the evaluator in
carrying out the computation, and the number of pushes correlates well with the
time required.

#### Exercise 5.28

Modify the definition of the
evaluator by changing `eval-sequence` as described in 5.4.2
so that the evaluator is no longer tail-recursive.  Rerun your experiments from
Exercise 5.26 and Exercise 5.27 to demonstrate that both versions
of the `factorial` procedure now require space that grows linearly with
their input.

#### Exercise 5.29

Monitor the stack operations in
the tree-recursive Fibonacci computation:

```rkt
(define (fib n)
  (if (< n 2)
      n
      (+ (fib (- n 1)) (fib (- n 2)))))
```

**1.** Give a formula in terms of $n$ for the maximum depth of the stack required to
compute ${\text{Fib}(n)$} for ${n \ge 2$}.  Hint: In 1.2.2 we
argued that the space used by this process grows linearly with $n$.

**2.** Give a formula for the total number of pushes used to compute ${\text{Fib}(n)$}
for ${n \ge 2$}.  You should find that the number of pushes (which correlates
well with the time used) grows exponentially with $n$.  Hint: Let
${S(n)$} be the number of pushes used in computing ${\text{Fib}(n)$}.  You
should be able to argue that there is a formula that expresses ${S(n)$} in
terms of ${S(n - 1)$}, ${S(n - 2)$}, and some fixed ``overhead''
constant $k$ that is independent of $n$.  Give the formula, and say what
$k$ is.  Then show that ${S(n)$} can be expressed as 
${a\cdot\text{Fib}(n + 1) + b$} and give the values of $a$ and $b$.



#### Exercise 5.30

Our evaluator currently catches
and signals only two kinds of errors---unknown expression types and unknown
procedure types.  Other errors will take us out of the evaluator
read-eval-print loop.  When we run the evaluator using the register-machine
simulator, these errors are caught by the underlying Scheme system.  This is
analogous to the computer crashing when a user program makes an
error.  It is a
large project to make a real error system work, but it is well worth the effort
to understand what is involved here.

**1.** Errors that occur in the evaluation process, such as an attempt to access an
unbound variable, could be caught by changing the lookup operation to make it
return a distinguished condition code, which cannot be a possible value of any
user variable.  The evaluator can test for this condition code and then do what
is necessary to go to `signal-error`.  Find all of the places in the
evaluator where such a change is necessary and fix them.  This is lots of work.

**2.** Much worse is the problem of handling errors that are signaled by applying
primitive procedures, such as an attempt to divide by zero or an attempt to
extract the `car` of a symbol.  In a professionally written high-quality
system, each primitive application is checked for safety as part of the
primitive.  For example, every call to `car` could first check that the
argument is a pair.  If the argument is not a pair, the application would
return a distinguished condition code to the evaluator, which would then report
the failure.  We could arrange for this in our register-machine simulator by
making each primitive procedure check for applicability and returning an
appropriate distinguished condition code on failure. Then the
`primitive-apply` code in the evaluator can check for the condition code
and go to `signal-error` if necessary.  Build this structure and make it
work.  This is a major project.



